1.--_The Reve's Puzzle._

The 8 cheeses can be removed in 33 moves, 10 cheeses in 49 moves, and 21
cheeses in 321 moves. I will give my general method of solution in the
cases of 3, 4, and 5 stools.

Write out the following table to any required length:--

  Stools.      Number of Cheeses.

  3      1  2  3   4   5    6    7      Natural Numbers.
  4      1  3  6  10  15   21   28      Triangular Numbers.
  5      1  4 10  20  35   56   84      Triangular Pyramids.

         Number of Moves.

  3      1  3  7  15  31   63  127
  4      1  5 17  49 129  321  769
  5      1  7 31 111 351 1023 2815

The first row contains the natural numbers. The second row is found by
adding the natural numbers together from the beginning. The numbers in
the third row are obtained by adding together the numbers in the second
row from the beginning. The fourth row contains the successive powers of
2, less 1. The next series is found by doubling in turn each number of
that series and adding the number that stands above the place where you
write the result. The last row is obtained in the same way. This table
will at once give solutions for any number of cheeses with three stools,
for triangular numbers with four stools, and for pyramidal numbers with
five stools. In these cases there is always only one method of
solution--that is, of piling the cheeses.

In the case of three stools, the first and fourth rows tell us that 4
cheeses may be removed in 15 moves, 5 in 31, 7 in 127. The second and
fifth rows show that, with four stools, 10 may be removed in 49, and 21
in 321 moves. Also, with five stools, we find from the third and sixth
rows that 20 cheeses require 111 moves, and 35 cheeses 351 moves. But we
also learn from the table the necessary method of piling. Thus, with four
stools and 10 cheeses, the previous column shows that we must make piles
of 6 and 3, which will take 17 and 7 moves respectively--that is, we
first pile the six smallest cheeses in 17 moves on one stool; then we
pile the next 3 cheeses on another stool in 7 moves; then remove the
largest cheese in 1 move; then replace the 3 in 7 moves; and finally
replace the 6 in 17: making in all the necessary 49 moves. Similarly we
are told that with five stools 35 cheeses must form piles of 20, 10, and
4, which will respectively take 111, 49, and 15 moves.

If the number of cheeses in the case of four stools is not triangular,
and in the case of five stools pyramidal, then there will be more than
one way of making the piles, and subsidiary tables will be required. This
is the case with the Reve's 8 cheeses. But I will leave the reader to
work out for himself the extension of the problem.




2.--_The Pardoner's Puzzle._

The diagram on page 165 will show how the Pardoner started from the large
black town and visited all the other towns once, and once only, in
fifteen straight pilgrimages.

See No. 320, "The Rook's Tour," in _A. in M._




3.--_The Miller's Puzzle._

The way to arrange the sacks of flour is as follows:--2, 78, 156, 39, 4.
Here each pair when multiplied by its single neighbour makes the number
in the middle, and only five of the sacks need be moved. There are just
three other ways in which they might have been arranged (4, 39, 156, 78,
2; or 3, 58, 174, 29, 6; or 6, 29, 174, 58, 3), but they all require the
moving of seven sacks.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




4.--_The Knight's Puzzle._

The Knight declared that as many as 575 squares could be marked off on
his shield, with a rose at every corner. How this result is achieved may
be realized by reference to the accompanying diagram:--Join A, B, C, and
D, and there are 66 squares of this size to be formed; the size A, E, F,
G gives 48; A, H, I, J, 32; B, K, L, M, 19; B, N, O, P, 10; B, Q, R, S,
4; E, T, F, C, 57; I, U, V, P, 33; H, W, X, J, 15; K, Y, Z, M, 3; E, a,
b, D, 82; H, d, M, D, 56; H, e, f, G, 42; K, g, f, C, 32; N, h, z, F, 24;
K, h, m, b, 14; K, O, S, D, 16; K, n, p, G, 10; K, q, r, J, 6; Q, t, p,
C, 4; Q, u, r, i, 2. The total number is thus 575. These groups have been
treated as if each of them represented a different sized square. This is
correct, with the one exception that the squares of the form B, N, O, P
are exactly the same size as those of the form K, h, m, b.




5.--_The Wife of Bath's Riddles._

The good lady explained that a bung that is made fast in a barrel is like
another bung that is falling out of a barrel because one of them is _in
secure_ and the other is also _insecure_. The little relationship poser
is readily understood when we are told that the parental command came
from the father (who was also in the room) and not from the mother.




6.--_The Host's Puzzle._

The puzzle propounded by the jovial host of the "Tabard" Inn of Southwark
had proved more popular than any other of the whole collection. "I see,
my merry masters," he cried, "that I have sorely twisted thy brains by my
little piece of craft. Yet it is but a simple matter for me to put a true
pint of fine old ale in each of these two measures, albeit one is of five
pints and the other of three pints, without using any other measure
whatever."

The host of the "Tabard" Inn thereupon proceeded to explain to the
pilgrims how this apparently impossible task could be done. He first
filled the 5-pint and 3-pint measures, and then, turning the tap, allowed
the barrel to run to waste--a proceeding against which the company
protested; but the wily man showed that he was aware that the cask did
not contain much more than eight pints of ale. The contents, however, do
not affect the solution of the puzzle. He then closed the tap and emptied
the 3-pint into the barrel; filled the 3-pint from the 5-pint; emptied
the 3-pint into the barrel; transferred the two pints from the 5-pint to
the 3-pint; filled the 5-pint from the barrel, leaving one pint now in
the barrel; filled 3-pint from 5-pint; allowed the company to drink the
contents of the 3-pint; filled the 3-pint from the 5-pint, leaving one
pint now in the 5-pint; drank the contents of the 3-pint; and finally
drew off one pint from the barrel into the 3-pint. He had thus obtained
the required one pint of ale in each measure, to the great astonishment
of the admiring crowd of pilgrims.




7.--_Clerk of Oxenford's Puzzle._

The illustration shows how the square is to be cut into four pieces, and
how these pieces are to be put together again to make a magic square. It
will be found that the four columns, four rows, and two long diagonals
now add up to 34 in every case.

[Illustration]




8.--_The Tapiser's Puzzle._

The piece of tapestry had to be cut along the lines into three pieces so
as to fit together and form a perfect square, with the pattern properly
matched. It was also stipulated in effect that one of the three pieces
must be as small as possible. The illustration shows how to make the cuts
and how to put the pieces together, while one of the pieces contains only
twelve of the little squares.

[Illustration]




9.--_The Carpenter's Puzzle._

The carpenter said that he made a box whose internal dimensions were
exactly the same as the original block of wood--that is, 3 feet by 1 foot
by 1 foot. He then placed the carved pillar in this box and filled up all
the vacant space with a fine, dry sand, which he carefully shook down
until he could get no more into the box. Then he removed the pillar,
taking great care not to lose any of the sand, which, on being shaken
down alone in the box, filled a space equal to one cubic foot. This was,
therefore, the quantity of wood that had been cut away.




10.--_The Puzzle of the Squire's Yeoman._

The illustration will show how three of the arrows were removed each to a
neighbouring square on the signboard of the "Chequers" Inn, so that still
no arrow was in line with another. The black dots indicate the squares on
which the three arrows originally stood.

[Illustration]




11.--_The Nun's Puzzle._

[Illustration]

As there are eighteen cards bearing the letters "CANTERBURY PILGRIMS,"
write the numbers 1 to 18 in a circle, as shown in the diagram. Then
write the first letter C against 1, and each successive letter against
the second number that happens to be vacant. This has been done as far as
the second R. If the reader completes the process by placing Y against 2,
P against 6, I against 10, and so on, he will get the letters all placed
in the following order:--CYASNPTREIRMBLUIRG, which is the required
arrangement for the cards, C being at the top of the pack and G at the
bottom.




12.--_The Merchant's Puzzle._

This puzzle amounts to finding the smallest possible number that has
exactly sixty-four divisors, counting 1 and the number itself as
divisors. The least number is 7,560. The pilgrims might, therefore, have
ridden in single file, two and two, three and three, four and four, and
so on, in exactly sixty-four different ways, the last manner being in a
single row of 7,560.

The Merchant was careful to say that they were going over a common, and
not to mention its size, for it certainly would not be possible along an
ordinary road!

To find how many different numbers will divide a given number, N, let N =
_a_^p _b_^q _c_^r ..., where _a_, _b_, _c_ ... are prime numbers. Then
the number of divisors will be (_p_ + 1) (_q_ + 1) (_r_ + 1) ..., which
includes as divisors 1 and N itself. Thus in the case of my puzzle--

  7,560  =  2^3 × 3^3 × 5 × 7
  Powers =  3     3     1   1
  Therefore 4   × 4   × 2 × 2 = 64 divisors.

To find the smallest number that has a given number of divisors we must
proceed by trial. But it is important sometimes to note whether or not
the condition is that there shall be a given number of divisors _and no
more_. For example, the smallest number that has seven divisors and no
more is 64, while 24 has eight divisors, and might equally fulfil the
conditions. The stipulation as to "no more" was not necessary in the case
of my puzzle, for no smaller number has more than sixty-four divisors.




13.--_The Man of Law's Puzzle._

The fewest possible moves for getting the prisoners into their dungeons
in the required numerical order are twenty-six. The men move in the
following order:--1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 6, 5, 3, 1, 2, 6, 5, 3, 1, 2, 4, 8, 7,
1, 2, 4, 8, 7, 4, 5, 6. As there are never more than one vacant dungeon
to be moved into, there can be no ambiguity in the notation.

[Illustration]

The diagram may be simplified by my "buttons and string" method, fully
explained in _A. in M._, p. 230. It then takes one of the simple forms of
A or B, and the solution is much easier. In A we use counters; in B we
can employ rooks on a corner of a chessboard. In both cases we have to
get the order

[Illustration:

  {1 2 3}
  {4 5 6}
  {7 8  }   ]

in the fewest possible moves.

See also solution to No. 94.




14.--_The Weaver's Puzzle._

The illustration shows clearly how the Weaver cut his square of beautiful
cloth into four pieces of exactly the same size and shape, so that each
piece contained an embroidered lion and castle unmutilated in any way.

[Illustration]




15.--_The Cook's Puzzle._

There were four portions of warden pie and four portions of venison pasty
to be distributed among eight out of eleven guests. But five out of the
eleven will only eat the pie, four will only eat the pasty, and two are
willing to eat of either. Any possible combination must fall into one of
the following groups. (i.) Where the warden pie is distributed entirely
among the five first mentioned; (ii.) where only one of the accommodating
pair is given pie; (iii.) where the other of the pair is given pie; (iv.)
where both of the pair are given pie. The numbers of combinations are:
(i.) = 75, (ii.) = 50, (iii.) = 10, (iv.) = 10--making in all 145 ways of
selecting the eight participants. A great many people will give the
answer as 185, by overlooking the fact that in forty cases in class
(iii.) precisely the same eight guests would be sharing the meal as in
class (ii.), though the accommodating pair would be eating differently of
the two dishes. This is the point that upset the calculations of the
company.




16.--_The Sompnour's Puzzle._

The number that the Sompnour confided to the Wife of Bath was
twenty-nine, and she was told to begin her count at the Doctor of Physic,
who will be seen in the illustration standing the second on her right.
The first count of twenty-nine falls on the Shipman, who steps out of the
ring. The second count falls on the Doctor, who next steps out. The
remaining three counts fall respectively on the Cook, the Sompnour, and
the Miller. The ladies would, therefore, have been left in possession had
it not been for the unfortunate error of the good Wife. Any multiple of
2,520 added to 29 would also have served the same purpose, beginning the
count at the Doctor.




17.--_The Monk's Puzzle._

The Monk might have placed dogs in the kennels in two thousand nine
hundred and twenty-six different ways, so that there should be ten dogs
on every side. The number of dogs might vary from twenty to forty, and
as long as the Monk kept his animals within these limits the thing was
always possible.

The general solution to this puzzle is difficult. I find that for _n_
dogs on every side of the square, the number of different ways is (_n_^4
+ 10_n_^3 + 38_n_^2 + 62_n_ + 33) / 48, where _n_ is odd, and ((_n_^4 +
10_n_^3 + 38_n_^2 + 68_n_) / 48) + 1, where _n_ is even, if we count only
those arrangements that are fundamentally different. But if we count all
reversals and reflections as different, as the Monk himself did, then _n_
dogs (odd or even) may be placed in ((_n_^4 + 6_n_^3 + 14_n_^2 + 15_n_) /
6) + 1 ways. In order that there may be _n_ dogs on every side, the
number must not be less than 2_n_ nor greater than 4_n_, but it may be
any number within these limits.

An extension of the principle involved in this puzzle is given in No. 42,
"The Riddle of the Pilgrims." See also "The Eight Villas" and "A
Dormitory Puzzle" in _A. in M._




18.--_The Shipman's Puzzle._

There are just two hundred and sixty-four different ways in which the
ship _Magdalen_ might have made her ten annual voyages without ever going
over the same course twice in a year. Every year she must necessarily end
her tenth voyage at the island from which she first set out.

[Illustration]




19.--_The Puzzle of the Prioress._

The Abbot of Chertsey was quite correct. The curiously-shaped cross may
be cut into four pieces that will fit together and form a perfect
square. How this is done is shown in the illustration.

See also p. 31 in _A. in M._




20.--_The Puzzle of the Doctor of Physic._

Here we have indeed a knotty problem. Our text-books tell us that all
spheres are similar, and that similar solids are as the cubes of
corresponding lengths. Therefore, as the circumferences of the two phials
were one foot and two feet respectively and the cubes of one and two
added together make nine, what we have to find is two other numbers whose
cubes added together make nine. These numbers clearly must be fractional.
Now, this little question has really engaged the attention of learned men
for two hundred and fifty years; but although Peter de Fermat showed in
the seventeenth century how an answer may be found in two fractions with
a denominator of no fewer than twenty-one figures, not only are all the
published answers, by his method, that I have seen inaccurate, but nobody
has ever published the much smaller result that I now print. The cubes of
(415280564497 / 348671682660) and (676702467503 / 348671682660) added
together make exactly nine, and therefore these fractions of a foot are
the measurements of the circumferences of the two phials that the Doctor
required to contain the same quantity of liquid as those produced. An
eminent actuary and another correspondent have taken the trouble to cube
out these numbers, and they both find my result quite correct.

If the phials were one foot and three feet in circumference respectively,
then an answer would be that the cubes of (63284705 / 21446828) and
(28340511 / 21446828) added together make exactly 28. See also No. 61,
"The Silver Cubes."

Given a known case for the expression of a number as the sum or
difference of two cubes, we can, by formula, derive from it an infinite
number of other cases alternately positive and negative. Thus Fermat,
starting from the known case 1^{3} + 2^{3} = 9 (which we will call a
fundamental case), first obtained a negative solution in bigger figures,
and from this his positive solution in bigger figures still. But there is
an infinite number of fundamentals, and I found by trial a negative
fundamental solution in smaller figures than his derived negative
solution, from which I obtained the result shown above. That is the
simple explanation.

We can say of any number up to 100 whether it is possible or not to
express it as the sum of two cubes, except 66. Students should read the
Introduction to Lucas's _Théorie des Nombres_, p. xxx.

Some years ago I published a solution for the case of

6 = (17/21)^3 + (37/21)^3,

of which Legendre gave at some length a "proof" of impossibility; but I
have since found that Lucas anticipated me in a communication to
Sylvester.

[Illustration]




21.--_The Ploughman's Puzzle._

The illustration shows how the sixteen trees might have been planted so
as to form as many as fifteen straight rows with four trees in every row.
This is in excess of what was for a long time believed to be the maximum
number of rows possible; and though with our present knowledge I cannot
rigorously demonstrate that fifteen rows cannot be beaten, I have a
strong "pious opinion" that it is the highest number of rows obtainable.




22.--_The Franklin's Puzzle._

The answer to this puzzle is shown in the illustration, where the numbers
on the sixteen bottles all add up to 30 in the ten straight directions.
The trick consists in the fact that, although the six bottles (3, 5, 6,
9, 10, and 15) in which the flowers have been placed are not removed, yet
the sixteen need not occupy exactly the same position on the table as
before. The square is, in fact, formed one step further to the left.

[Illustration]




23.--_The Squire's Puzzle._

The portrait may be drawn in a single line because it contains only two
points at which an odd number of lines meet, but it is absolutely
necessary to begin at one of these points and end at the other. One point
is near the outer extremity of the King's left eye; the other is below it
on the left cheek.




24.--_The Friar's Puzzle._

The five hundred silver pennies might have been placed in the four bags,
in accordance with the stated conditions, in exactly 894,348 different
ways. If there had been a thousand coins there would be 7,049,112 ways.
It is a difficult problem in the partition of numbers. I have a single
formula for the solution of any number of coins in the case of four bags,
but it was extremely hard to construct, and the best method is to find
the twelve separate formulas for the different congruences to the modulus
12.




25.--_The Parson's Puzzle._

[Illustration]

A very little examination of the original drawing will have shown the
reader that, as he will have at first read the conditions, the puzzle is
quite impossible of solution. We have therefore to look for some
loophole in the actual conditions as they were worded. If the Parson
could get round the source of the river, he could then cross every bridge
once and once only on his way to church, as shown in the annexed
illustration. That this was not prohibited we shall soon find. Though the
plan showed all the bridges in his parish, it only showed "part of" the
parish itself. It is not stated that the river did not take its rise in
the parish, and since it leads to the only possible solution, we must
assume that it did. The answer would be, therefore, as shown. It should
be noted that we are clearly prevented from considering the possibility
of getting round the mouth of the river, because we are told it "joined
the sea some hundred miles to the south," while no parish ever extended a
hundred miles!




26.--_The Haberdasher's Puzzle._

[Illustration]

The illustration will show how the triangular piece of cloth may be cut
into four pieces that will fit together and form a perfect square. Bisect
AB in D and BC in E; produce the line AE to F making EF equal to EB;
bisect AF in G and describe the arc AHF; produce EB to H, and EH is the
length of the side of the required square; from E with distance EH,
describe the arc HJ, and make JK equal to BE; now, from the points D and
K drop perpendiculars on EJ at L and M. If you have done this accurately,
you will now have the required directions for the cuts.

[Illustration]

I exhibited this problem before the Royal Society, at Burlington House,
on 17th May 1905, and also at the Royal Institution in the following
month, in the more general form:--"A New Problem on Superposition: a
demonstration that an equilateral triangle can be cut into four pieces
that may be reassembled to form a square, with some examples of a general
method for transforming all rectilinear triangles into squares by
dissection." It was also issued as a challenge to the readers of the
_Daily Mail_ (see issues of 1st and 8th February 1905), but though many
hundreds of attempts were sent in there was not a single solver. Credit,
however, is due to Mr. C. W. M'Elroy, who alone sent me the correct
solution when I first published the problem in the _Weekly Dispatch_ in
1902.

I add an illustration showing the puzzle in a rather curious practical
form, as it was made in polished mahogany with brass hinges for use by
certain audiences. It will be seen that the four pieces form a sort of
chain, and that when they are closed up in one direction they form the
triangle, and when closed in the other direction they form the square.




27.--_The Dyer's Puzzle._

The correct answer is 18,816 different ways. The general formula for six
fleurs-de-lys for all squares greater than 2^{2} is simply this: Six
times the square of the number of combinations of _n_ things, taken three
at a time, where _n_ represents the number of fleurs-de-lys in the side
of the square. Of course where _n_ is even the remainders in rows and
columns will be even, and where _n_ is odd the remainders will be odd.

For further solution, see No. 358 in _A. in M._




28.--_The Great Dispute between the Friar and the Sompnour._

In this little problem we attempted to show how, by sophistical
reasoning, it may apparently be proved that the diagonal of a square is
of precisely the same length as two of the sides. The puzzle was to
discover the fallacy, because it is a very obvious fallacy if we admit
that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. But
where does the error come in?

Well, it is perfectly true that so long as our zigzag path is formed of
"steps" parallel to the sides of the square that path must be of the same
length as the two sides. It does not matter if you have to use the most
powerful microscope obtainable; the rule is always true if the path is
made up of steps in that way. But the error lies in the assumption that
such a zigzag path can ever become a straight line. You may go on
increasing the number of steps infinitely--that is, there is no limit
whatever theoretically to the number of steps that can be made--but you
can never reach a straight line by such a method. In fact it is just as
much a "jump" to a straight line if you have a billion steps as it is at
the very outset to pass from the two sides to the diagonal. It would be
just as absurd to say we might go on dropping marbles into a basket until
they become sovereigns as to say we can increase the number of our steps
until they become a straight line. There is the whole thing in a
nutshell.




29.--_Chaucer's Puzzle._

The surface of water or other liquid is always spherical, and the greater
any sphere is the less is its convexity. Hence the top diameter of any
vessel at the summit of a mountain will form the base of the segment of a
greater sphere than it would at the bottom. This sphere, being greater,
must (from what has been already said) be less convex; or, in other
words, the spherical surface of the water must be less above the brim of
the vessel, and consequently it will hold less at the top of a mountain
than at the bottom. The reader is therefore free to select any mountain
he likes in Italy--or elsewhere!




30.--_The Puzzle of the Canon's Yeoman._

The number of different ways is 63,504. The general formula for such
arrangements, when the number of letters in the sentence is 2_n_ + 1, and
it is a palindrome without diagonal readings, is [4(2^_n_ - 1)]^2.

I think it will be well to give here a formula for the general solution
of each of the four most common forms of the diamond-letter puzzle. By
the word "line" I mean the complete diagonal. Thus in A, B, C, and D, the
lines respectively contain 5, 5, 7, and 9 letters. A has a non-palindrome
line (the word being BOY), and the general solution for such cases, where
the line contains 2_n_ + 1 letters, is 4(2^_n_ - 1). Where the line is a
single palindrome, with its middle letter in the centre, as in B, the
general formula is [4(2^_n_ - 1)]^{2}. This is the form of the
Rat-catcher's Puzzle, and therefore the expression that I have given
above. In cases C and D we have double palindromes, but these two
represent very different types. In C, where the line contains 4^n-1
letters, the general expression is 4^(2^{2_n_}-2). But D is by far the
most difficult case of all.

I had better here state that in the diamonds under consideration (i.) no
diagonal readings are allowed--these have to be dealt with specially in
cases where they are possible and admitted; (ii.) readings may start
anywhere; (iii.) readings may go backwards and forwards, using letters
more than once in a single reading, but not the same letter twice in
immediate succession. This last condition will be understood if the
reader glances at C, where it is impossible to go forwards and backwards
in a reading without repeating the first O touched--a proceeding which I
have said is not allowed. In the case D it is very different, and this is
what accounts for its greater difficulty. The formula for D is this:

[Illustration:

  (_n_+5)×2^{2_n_+2} + (2^{_n_+2}×(1×3×5×7
  . . . . . (2n-1)) / _n_) - 2^{_n_+4} - 8   ]

where the number of letters in the line is 4_n_+1. In the example given
there are therefore 400 readings for _n_ = 2.

See also Nos. 256, 257, and 258 in _A. in M._

[Illustration

  A

    Y
   YOY
  YOBOY
   YOY
    Y

  B
    L
   LEL
  LEVEL
   LEL
    L

  C

     N
    NON
   NOOON
  NOONOON
   NOOON
    NON
     N

  D

      L
     LEL
    LEVEL
   LEVEVEL
  LEVELEVEL
   LEVEVEL
    LEVEL
     LEL
      L   ]




31.--_The Manciple's Puzzle._

The simple Ploughman, who was so ridiculed for his opinion, was perfectly
correct: the Miller should receive seven pieces of money, and the Weaver
only one. As all three ate equal shares of the bread, it should be
evident that each ate 8/3 of a loaf. Therefore, as the Miller provided
15/3 and ate 8/3, he contributed 7/3 to the Manciple's meal; whereas the
Weaver provided 9/3, ate 8/3, and contributed only 1/3. Therefore, since
they contributed to the Manciple in the proportion of 7 to 1, they must
divide the eight pieces of money in the same proportion.




PUZZLING TIMES AT SOLVAMHALL CASTLE

_SIR HUGH EXPLAINS HIS PROBLEMS_


The friends of Sir Hugh de Fortibus were so perplexed over many of his
strange puzzles that at a gathering of his kinsmen and retainers he
undertook to explain his posers.

[Illustration]

"Of a truth," said he, "some of the riddles that I have put forth would
greatly tax the wit of the unlettered knave to rede; yet will I try to
show the manner thereof in such way that all may have understanding. For
many there be who cannot of themselves do all these things, but will yet
study them to their gain when they be given the answers, and will take
pleasure therein."




32.--_The Game of Bandy-Ball._

Sir Hugh explained, in answer to this puzzle, that as the nine holes were
300, 250, 200, 325, 275, 350, 225, 375, and 400 yards apart, if a man
could always strike the ball in a perfectly straight line and send it at
will a distance of either 125 yards or 100 yards, he might go round the
whole course in 26 strokes. This is clearly correct, for if we call the
125 stroke the "drive" and the 100 stroke the "approach," he could play
as follows:--The first hole could be reached in 3 approaches, the second
in 2 drives, the third in 2 approaches, the fourth in 2 approaches and 1
drive, the fifth in 3 drives and 1 backward approach, the sixth in 2
drives and 1 approach, the seventh in 1 drive and 1 approach, the eighth
in 3 drives, and the ninth hole in 4 approaches. There are thus 26
strokes in all, and the feat cannot be performed in fewer.




33.--_Tilting at the Ring._

[Illustration]

"By my halidame!" exclaimed Sir Hugh, "if some of yon varlets had been
put in chains, which for their sins they do truly deserve, then would
they well know, mayhap, that the length of any chain having like rings is
equal to the inner width of a ring multiplied by the number of rings and
added to twice the thickness of the iron whereof it is made. It may be
shown that the inner width of the rings used in the tilting was one inch
and two-thirds thereof, and the number of rings Stephen Malet did win
was three, and those that fell to Henry de Gournay would be nine."

The knight was quite correct, for 1-2/3 in. × 3 + 1 in. = 6 in., and
1-2/3 in. x 9 + 1 in. = 16 in. Thus De Gournay beat Malet by six rings.
The drawing showing the rings may assist the reader in verifying the
answer and help him to see why the inner width of a link multiplied by
the number of links and added to twice the thickness of the iron gives
the exact length. It will be noticed that every link put on the chain
loses a length equal to twice the thickness of the iron.




34.--_The Noble Demoiselle._

[Illustration]

"Some here have asked me," continued Sir Hugh, "how they may find the
cell in the Dungeon of the Death's-head wherein the noble maiden was
cast. Beshrew me! but 'tis easy withal when you do but know how to do it.
In attempting to pass through every door once, and never more, you must
take heed that every cell hath two doors or four, which be even numbers,
except two cells, which have but three. Now, certes, you cannot go in and
out of any place, passing through all the doors once and no more, if the
number of doors be an odd number. But as there be but two such odd cells,
yet may we, by beginning at the one and ending at the other, so make our
journey in many ways with success. I pray you, albeit, to mark that only
one of these odd cells lieth on the outside of the dungeon, so we must
perforce start therefrom. Marry, then, my masters, the noble demoiselle
must needs have been wasting in the other."

The drawing will make this quite clear to the reader. The two "odd cells"
are indicated by the stars, and one of the many routes that will solve
the puzzle is shown by the dotted line. It is perfectly certain that you
must start at the lower star and end at the upper one; therefore the cell
with the star situated over the left eye must be the one sought.




35.--_The Archery Butt._

[Illustration]

"It hath been said that the proof of a pudding is ever in the eating
thereof, and by the teeth of Saint George I know no better way of showing
how this placing of the figures may be done than by the doing of it.
Therefore have I in suchwise written the numbers that they do add up to
twenty and three in all the twelve lines of three that are upon the
butt."

I think it well here to supplement the solution of De Fortibus with a few
remarks of my own. The nineteen numbers may be so arranged that the lines
will add up to any number we may choose to select from 22 to 38
inclusive, excepting 30. In some cases there are several different
solutions, but in the case of 23 there are only two. I give one of these.
To obtain the second solution exchange respectively 7, 10, 5, 8, 9, in
the illustration, with 13, 4, 17, 2, 15. Also exchange 18 with 12, and
the other numbers may remain unmoved. In every instance there must be an
even number in the central place, and any such number from 2 to 18 may
occur. Every solution has its complementary. Thus, if for every number in
the accompanying drawing we substitute the difference between it and 20,
we get the solution in the case of 37. Similarly, from the arrangement in
the original drawing, we may at once obtain a solution for the case of
38.

[Illustration]




36.--_The Donjon Keep Window._

In this case Sir Hugh had greatly perplexed his chief builder by
demanding that he should make a window measuring one foot on every side
and divided by bars into eight lights, having all their sides equal. The
illustration will show how this was to be done. It will be seen that if
each side of the window measures one foot, then each of the eight
triangular lights is six inches on every side.

"Of a truth, master builder," said De Fortibus slyly to the architect, "I
did not tell thee that the window must be square, as it is most certain
it never could be."




37.--_The Crescent and the Cross._

"By the toes of St. Moden," exclaimed Sir Hugh de Fortibus when this
puzzle was brought up, "my poor wit hath never shaped a more cunning
artifice or any more bewitching to look upon. It came to me as in a
vision, and ofttimes have I marvelled at the thing, seeing its exceeding
difficulty. My masters and kinsmen, it is done in this wise."

[Illustration]

The worthy knight then pointed out that the crescent was of a particular
and somewhat irregular form--the two distances _a_ to _b_ and _c_ to _d_
being straight lines, and the arcs _ac_ and _bd_ being precisely similar.
He showed that if the cuts be made as in Figure 1, the four pieces will
fit together and form a perfect square, as shown in Figure 2, if we there
only regard the three curved lines. By now making the straight cuts also
shown in Figure 2, we get the ten pieces that fit together, as in Figure
3, and form a perfectly symmetrical Greek cross. The proportions of the
crescent and the cross in the original illustration were correct, and
the solution can be demonstrated to be absolutely exact and not merely
approximate.

I have a solution in considerably fewer pieces, but it is far more
difficult to understand than the above method, in which the problem is
simplified by introducing the intermediate square.




38.--_The Amulet._

The puzzle was to place your pencil on the A at the top of the amulet and
count in how many different ways you could trace out the word
"Abracadabra" downwards, always passing from a letter to an adjoining
one.

            A
           B B
          R R R
         A A A A
        C C C C C
       A A A A A A
      D D D D D D D
     A A A A A A A A
    B B B B B B B B B
   R R R R R R R R R R
  A A A A A A A A A A A

"Now, mark ye, fine fellows," said Sir Hugh to some who had besought him
to explain, "that at the very first start there be two ways open:
whichever B ye select, there will be two several ways of proceeding
(twice times two are four); whichever R ye select, there be two ways of
going on (twice times four are eight); and so on until the end. Each
letter in order from A downwards may so be reached in 2, 4, 8, 16, 32,
etc., ways. Therefore, as there be ten lines or steps in all from A to
the bottom, all ye need do is to multiply ten 2's together, and truly the
result, 1024, is the answer thou dost seek."




39.--_The Snail on the Flagstaff._

Though there was no need to take down and measure the staff, it is
undoubtedly necessary to find its height before the answer can be given.
It was well known among the friends and retainers of Sir Hugh de Fortibus
that he was exactly six feet in height. It will be seen in the original
picture that Sir Hugh's height is just twice the length of his shadow.
Therefore we all know that the flagstaff will, at the same place and time
of day, be also just twice as long as its shadow. The shadow of the staff
is the same length as Sir Hugh's height; therefore this shadow is six
feet long, and the flagstaff must be twelve feet high. Now, the snail, by
climbing up three feet in the daytime and slipping back two feet by
night, really advances one foot in a day of twenty-four hours. At the end
of nine days it is three feet from the top, so that it reaches its
journey's end on the tenth day.

The reader will doubtless here exclaim, "This is all very well; but how
were we to know the height of Sir Hugh? It was never stated how tall he
was!" No, it was not stated in so many words, but it was none the less
clearly indicated to the reader who is sharp in these matters. In the
original illustration to the donjon keep window Sir Hugh is shown
standing against a wall, the window in which is stated to be one foot
square on the inside. Therefore, as his height will be found by
measurement to be just six times the inside height of the window, he
evidently stands just six feet in his boots!




40.--_Lady Isabel's Casket._

The last puzzle was undoubtedly a hard nut, but perhaps difficulty does
not make a good puzzle any the less interesting when we are shown the
solution. The accompanying diagram indicates exactly how the top of Lady
Isabel de Fitzarnulph's casket was inlaid with square pieces of rare wood
(no two squares alike) and the strip of gold 10 inches by a quarter of an
inch. This is the only possible solution, and it is a singular fact
(though I cannot here show the subtle method of working) that the number,
sizes, and order of those squares are determined by the given dimensions
of the strip of gold, and the casket can have no other dimensions than 20
inches square. The number in a square indicates the length in inches of
the side of that square, so the accuracy of the answer can be checked
almost at a glance.

Sir Hugh de Fortibus made some general concluding remarks on the occasion
that are not altogether uninteresting to-day.

[Illustration]

"Friends and retainers," he said, "if the strange offspring of my poor
wit about which we have held pleasant counsel to-night hath mayhap had
some small interest for ye, let these matters serve to call to mind the
lesson that our fleeting life is rounded and beset with enigmas. Whence
we came and whither we go be riddles, and albeit such as these we may
never bring within our understanding, yet there be many others with which
we and they that do come after us will ever strive for the answer.
Whether success do attend or do not attend our labour, it is well that we
make the attempt; for 'tis truly good and honourable to train the mind,
and the wit, and the fancy of man, for out of such doth issue all manner
of good in ways unforeseen for them that do come after us."




THE MERRY MONKS OF RIDDLEWELL




41.--_The Riddle of the Fish-pond._

Number the fish baskets in the illustration from 1 to 12 in the direction
that Brother Jonathan is seen to be going. Starting from 1, proceed as
follows, where "1 to 4" means, take the fish from basket No. 1 and
transfer it to basket No. 4:--

1 to 4, 5 to 8, 9 to 12, 3 to 6, 7 to 10, 11 to 2, and complete the last
revolution to 1, making three revolutions in all. Or you can proceed this
way:--

4 to 7, 8 to 11, 12 to 3, 2 to 5, 6 to 9, 10 to 1.

It is easy to solve in four revolutions, but the solutions in three are
more difficult to discover.




42.--_The Riddle of the Pilgrims._

If it were not for the Abbot's conditions that the number of guests in
any room may not exceed three, and that every room must be occupied, it
would have been possible to accommodate either 24, 27, 30, 33, 36, 39, or
42 pilgrims. But to accommodate 24 pilgrims so that there shall be twice
as many sleeping on the upper floor as on the lower floor, and eleven
persons on each side of the building, it will be found necessary to leave
some of the rooms empty. If, on the other hand, we try to put up 33, 36,
39 or 42 pilgrims, we shall find that in every case we are obliged to
place more than three persons in some of the rooms. Thus we know that the
number of pilgrims originally announced (whom, it will be remembered, it
was possible to accommodate under the conditions of the Abbot) must have
been 27, and that, since three more than this number were actually
provided with beds, the total number of pilgrims was 30. The accompanying
diagram shows how they might be arranged, and if in each instance we
regard the upper floor as placed above the lower one, it will be seen
that there are eleven persons on each side of the building, and twice as
many above as below.

[Illustration]




43.--_The Riddle of the Tiled Hearth._

The correct answer is shown in the illustration on page 196. No tile is
in line (either horizontally, vertically, or diagonally) with another
tile of the same design, and only three plain tiles are used. If after
placing the four lions you fall into the error of placing four other
tiles of another pattern, instead of only three, you will be left with
four places that must be occupied by plain tiles. The secret consists in
placing four of one kind and only three of each of the others.

[Illustration]




44.--_The Riddle of the Sack of Wine._

The question was: Did Brother Benjamin take more wine from the bottle
than water from the jug? Or did he take more water from the jug than wine
from the bottle? He did neither. The same quantity of wine was
transferred from the bottle as water was taken from the jug. Let us
assume that the glass would hold a quarter of a pint. There was a pint of
wine in the bottle and a pint of water in the jug. After the first
manipulation the bottle contains three-quarters of a pint of wine, and
the jug one pint of water mixed with a quarter of a pint of wine. Now,
the second transaction consists in taking away a fifth of the contents of
the jug--that is, one-fifth of a pint of water mixed with one-fifth of a
quarter of a pint of wine. We thus leave behind in the jug four-fifths of
a quarter of a pint of wine--that is, one-fifth of a pint--while we
transfer from the jug to the bottle an equal quantity (one-fifth of a
pint) of water.




45.--_The Riddle of the Cellarer._

There were 100 pints of wine in the cask, and on thirty occasions John
the Cellarer had stolen a pint and replaced it with a pint of water.
After the first theft the wine left in the cask would be 99 pints; after
the second theft the wine in the cask would be 9801/100 pints (the square
of 99 divided by 100); after the third theft there would remain
970299/10000 (the cube of 99 divided by the square of 100); after the
fourth theft there would remain the fourth power of 99 divided by the
cube of 100; and after the thirtieth theft there would remain in the cask
the thirtieth power of 99 divided by the twenty-ninth power of 100. This
by the ordinary method of calculation gives us a number composed of 59
figures to be divided by a number composed of 58 figures! But by the use
of logarithms it may be quickly ascertained that the required quantity is
very nearly 73-97/100 pints of wine left in the cask. Consequently the
cellarer stole nearly 26.03 pints. The monks doubtless omitted the answer
for the reason that they had no tables of logarithms, and did not care to
face the task of making that long and tedious calculation in order to get
the quantity "to a nicety," as the wily cellarer had stipulated.

By a simplified process of calculation, I have ascertained that the exact
quantity of wine stolen would be

  26.0299626611719577269984907683285057747323737647323555652999

pints. A man who would involve the monastery in a fraction of fifty-eight
decimals deserved severe punishment.




46.--_The Riddle of the Crusaders._

The correct answer is that there would have been 602,176 Crusaders, who
could form themselves into a square 776 by 776; and after the stranger
joined their ranks, they could form 113 squares of 5,329 men--that is, 73
by 73. Or 113 × 73^2 - 1 = 776^2. This is a particular case of the
so-called "Pellian Equation," respecting which see _A. in M._, p. 164.




47.--_The Riddle of St. Edmondsbury._

The reader is aware that there are prime numbers and composite whole
numbers. Now, 1,111,111 cannot be a prime number, because if it were the
only possible answers would be those proposed by Brother Benjamin and
rejected by Father Peter. Also it cannot have more than two factors, or
the answer would be indeterminate. As a matter of fact, 1,111,111 equals
239 x 4649 (both primes), and since each cat killed more mice than there
were cats, the answer must be 239 cats. See also the Introduction, p. 18.

Treated generally, this problem consists in finding the factors, if any,
of numbers of the form (10^_n_ - 1)/9.

Lucas, in his _L'Arithmétique Amusante_, gives a number of curious tables
which he obtained from an arithmetical treatise, called the _Talkhys_, by
Ibn Albanna, an Arabian mathematician and astronomer of the first half of
the thirteenth century. In the Paris National Library are several
manuscripts dealing with the _Talkhys_, and a commentary by Alkalaçadi,
who died in 1486. Among the tables given by Lucas is one giving all the
factors of numbers of the above form up to _n_ = 18. It seems almost
inconceivable that Arabians of that date could find the factors where _n_
= 17, as given in my Introduction. But I read Lucas as stating that they
are given in _Talkhys_, though an eminent mathematician reads him
differently, and suggests to me that they were discovered by Lucas
himself. This can, of course, be settled by an examination of _Talkhys_,
but this has not been possible during the war.

The difficulty lies wholly with those cases where _n_ is a prime number.
If _n_ = 2, we get the prime 11. The factors when _n_ = 3, 5, 11, and 13
are respectively (3 . 37), (41 . 271), (21,649 . 513,239), and (53 . 79 .
265371653). I have given in these pages the factors where _n_ = 7 and 17.
The factors when _n_= 19, 23, and 37 are unknown, if there are any.[B]
When _n_ = 29, the factors are (3,191 . 16,763 . 43,037. 62,003 .
77,843,839,397); when _n_ = 31, one factor is 2,791; and when _n_ = 41,
two factors are (83 . 1,231).

[B] Mr. Oscar Hoppe, of New York, informs me that, after reading my
statement in the Introduction, he was led to investigate the case of _n_
= 19, and after long and tedious work he succeeded in proving the number
to be a prime. He submitted his proof to the London Mathematical Society,
and a specially appointed committee of that body accepted the proof as
final and conclusive. He refers me to the _Proceedings_ of the Society
for 14th February 1918.

As for the even values of _n_, the following curious series of factors
will doubtless interest the reader. The numbers in brackets are primes.

_n_ = 2 = (11)

_n_ = 6 = (11) × 111 × 91

_n_ = 10 = (11) × 11,111 × (9,091)

_n_ = 14 = (11) × 1,111,111 × (909,091)

_n_ = 18 = (11) × 111,111,111 × 90,909,091

Or we may put the factors this way:--

_n_ = 2 = (11)

_n_ = 6 = 111 × 1,001

_n_ = 10 = 11,111 × 100,001

_n_ = 14 = 1,111,111 × 10,000,001

_n_ = 18 = 111,111,111 × 1,000,000,001

In the above two tables _n_ is of the form 4_m_ + 2. When _n_ is of the
form 4_m_ the factors may be written down as follows:--

_n_= 4 = (11) × (101)

_n_ = 8 = (11) × (101) × 10,001

_n_ = 12 = (11) × (101) × 100,010,001

_n_ = 16 = (11) × (101) × 1,000,100,010,001.

When _n_ = 2, we have the prime number 11; when _n_ = 3, the factors are
3 . 37; when _n_ = 6, they are 11 . 3 . 37 . 7. 13; when _n_ = 9, they
are 3^2 . 37 . 333,667. Therefore we know that factors of _n_ = 18 are
11. 3^2 . 37 . 7 . 13 . 333,667, while the remaining factor is composite
and can be split into 19 . 52579. This will show how the working may be
simplified when _n_ is not prime.




48.--_The Riddle of the Frogs' Ring._

The fewest possible moves in which this puzzle can be solved are 118. I
will give the complete solution. The black figures on white discs move
in the directions of the hands of a clock, and the white figures on black
discs the other way. The following are the numbers in the order in which
they move. Whether you have to make a simple move or a leaping move will
be clear from the position, as you never can have an alternative. The
moves enclosed in brackets are to be played five times over: 6, 7, 8, 6,
5, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 (6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1), 6,
5, 4, 3, 2, 12, (7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12), 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 1, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2,
12, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 4, 3, 2, 10, 11, 2. We
thus have made 118 moves within the conditions, the black frogs have
changed places with the white ones, and 1 and 12 are side by side in the
positions stipulated.

The general solution in the case of this puzzle is 3_n_^{2} + 2_n_ - 2
moves, where the number of frogs of each colour is _n_. The law governing
the sequence of moves is easily discovered by an examination of the
simpler cases, where _n_ = 2, 3, and 4.

If, instead of 11 and 12 changing places, the 6 and 7 must interchange,
the expression is _n_^{2} + 4_n_ + 2 moves. If we give _n_ the value 6,
as in the example of the Frogs' Ring, the number of moves would be 62.

For a general solution of the case where frogs of one colour reverse
their order, leaving the blank space in the same position, and each frog
is allowed to be moved in either direction (leaping, of course, over his
own colour), see "The Grasshopper Puzzle" in _A. in M._, p. 193.




THE STRANGE ESCAPE OF THE KING'S JESTER


Although the king's jester promised that he would "thereafter make the
manner thereof plain to all," there is no record of his having ever done
so. I will therefore submit to the reader my own views as to the probable
solutions to the mysteries involved.




49.--_The Mysterious Rope._

When the jester "divided his rope in half," it does not follow that he
cut it into two parts, each half the original length of the rope. No
doubt he simply untwisted the strands, and so divided it into two ropes,
each of the original length, but one-half the thickness. He would thus be
able to tie the two together and make a rope nearly twice the original
length, with which it is quite conceivable that he made good his escape
from the dungeon.




50.--_The Underground Maze._

How did the jester find his way out of the maze in the dark? He had
simply to grope his way to a wall and then keep on walking without once
removing his left hand (or right hand) from the wall. Starting from A,
the dotted line will make the route clear when he goes to the left. If
the reader tries the route to the right in the same way he will be
equally successful; in fact, the two routes unite and cover every part of
the walls of the maze except those two detached parts on the left-hand
side--one piece like a U, and the other like a distorted E. This rule
will apply to the majority of mazes and puzzle gardens; but if the centre
were enclosed by an isolated wall in the form of a split ring, the jester
would simply have gone round and round this ring.

See the article, "Mazes, and How to Thread Them," _in A. in M._




51.--_The Secret Lock._

This puzzle entailed the finding of an English word of three letters,
each letter being found on a different dial. Now, there is no English
word composed of consonants alone, and the only vowel appearing anywhere
on the dials is Y. No English word begins with Y and has the two other
letters consonants, and all the words of three letters ending in Y (with
two consonants) either begin with an S or have H, L, or R as their second
letter. But these four consonants do not appear. Therefore Y must occur
in the middle, and the only word that I can find is "PYX," and there can
be little doubt that this was the word. At any rate, it solves our
puzzle.




52.--_Crossing the Moat._

No doubt some of my readers will smile at the statement that a man in a
boat on smooth water can pull himself across with the tiller rope! But it
is a fact. If the jester had fastened the end of his rope to the stern of
the boat and then, while standing in the bows, had given a series of
violent jerks, the boat would have been propelled forward. This has often
been put to a practical test, and it is said that a speed of two or three
miles an hour may be attained. See W. W. Rouse Ball's _Mathematical
Recreations_.




53.--_The Royal Gardens._

[Illustration]

This puzzle must have struck many readers as being absolutely impossible.
The jester said: "I had, of a truth, entered every one of the sixteen
gardens once, and never more than once." If we follow the route shown in
the accompanying diagram, we find that there is no difficulty in once
entering all the gardens but one before reaching the last garden
containing the exit B. The difficulty is to get into the garden with a
star, because if we leave the B garden we are compelled to enter it a
second time before escaping, and no garden may be entered twice. The
trick consists in the fact that you may enter that starred garden without
necessarily leaving the other. If, when the jester got to the gateway
where the dotted line makes a sharp bend, his intention had been to hide
in the starred garden, but after he had put one foot through the doorway,
upon the star, he discovered it was a false alarm and withdrew, he could
truly say: "I entered the starred garden, because I put my foot and part
of my body in it; and I did not enter the other garden twice, because,
after once going in I never left it until I made my exit at B." This is
the only answer possible, and it was doubtless that which the jester
intended.

See "The Languishing Maiden," in _A. in M._




54.--_Bridging the Ditch._

[Illustration]

The solution to this puzzle is best explained by the illustration. If he
had placed his eight planks, in the manner shown, across the angle of the
ditch, he would have been able to cross without much trouble. The king's
jester might thus have well overcome all his difficulties and got safely
away, as he has told us that he succeeded in doing.




THE SQUIRE'S CHRISTMAS PUZZLE PARTY

_HOW THE VARIOUS TRICKS WERE DONE_


The record of one of Squire Davidge's annual "Puzzle Parties," made by
the old gentleman's young lady relative, who had often spent a merry
Christmas at Stoke Courcy Hall, does not contain the solutions of the
mysteries. So I will give my own answers to the puzzles and try to make
them as clear as possible to those who may be more or less novices in
such matters.




55.--_The Three Teacups._

[Illustration]

Miss Charity Lockyer clearly must have had a trick up her sleeve, and I
think it highly probable that it was conceived on the following lines.
She proposed that ten lumps of sugar should be placed in three teacups,
so that there should be an odd number of lumps in every cup. The
illustration perhaps shows Miss Charity's answer, and the figures on the
cups indicate the number of lumps that have been separately placed in
them. By placing the cup that holds one lump inside the one that holds
two lumps, it can be correctly stated that every cup contains an odd
number of lumps. One cup holds seven lumps, another holds one lump, while
the third cup holds three lumps. It is evident that if a cup contains
another cup it also contains the contents of that second cup.

There are in all fifteen different solutions to this puzzle. Here they
are:--

  1 0 9     1 4 5     9 0 1
  3 0 7     7 0 3     7 2 1
  1 2 7     5 2 3     5 4 1
  5 0 5     3 4 3     3 6 1
  3 2 5     1 6 3     1 8 1

The first two numbers in a triplet represent respectively the number of
lumps to be placed in the inner and outer of the two cups that are placed
one inside the other. It will be noted that the outer cup of the pair may
itself be empty.




56.--_The Eleven Pennies._

It is rather evident that the trick in this puzzle was as follows:--From
the eleven coins take five; then add four (to those already taken away)
and you leave nine--in the second heap of those removed!




57.--_The Christmas Geese._

Farmer Rouse sent exactly 101 geese to market. Jabez first sold Mr.
Jasper Tyler half of the flock and half a goose over (that is, 50-1/2 +
1/2, or 51 geese, leaving 50); he then sold Farmer Avent a third of what
remained and a third of a goose over (that is, 16-2/3 + 1/3, or 17 geese,
leaving 33); he then sold Widow Foster a quarter of what remained and
three-quarters of a goose over (that is, 8-1/4 + 3/4 or 9 geese, leaving
24); he next sold Ned Collier a fifth of what he had left and gave him a
fifth of a goose "for the missus" (that is, 4-4/5 + 1/5 or 5 geese,
leaving 19). He then took these 19 back to his master.




58.--_The Chalked Numbers._

This little jest on the part of Major Trenchard is another trick puzzle,
and the face of the roguish boy on the extreme right, with the figure 9
on his back, showed clearly that he was in the secret, whatever that
secret might be. I have no doubt (bearing in mind the Major's hint as to
the numbers being "properly regarded") that his answer was that depicted
in the illustration, where boy No. 9 stands on his head and so converts
his number into 6. This makes the total 36--an even number--and by making
boys 3 and 4 change places with 7 and 8, we get 1278 and 5346, the
figures of which, in each case, add up to 18. There are just three other
ways in which the boys may be grouped: 1368--2457, 1467--2358, and
2367--1458.




59.--_Tasting the Plum Puddings._

The diagram will show how this puzzle is to be solved. It is the only way
within the conditions laid down. Starting at the pudding with holly at
the top left-hand corner, we strike out all the puddings in twenty-one
straight strokes, taste the steaming hot pudding at the end of the tenth
stroke, and end at the second sprig of holly.

Here we have an example of a chess rook's path that is not re-entrant,
but between two squares that are at the greatest possible distance from
one another. For if it were desired to move, under the condition of
visiting every square once and once only, from one corner square to the
other corner square on the same diagonal, the feat is impossible.

There are a good many different routes for passing from one sprig of holly
to the other in the smallest possible number of moves--twenty-one--but I
have not counted them. I have recorded fourteen of these, and possibly
there are more. Any one of these would serve our purpose, except for the
condition that the tenth stroke shall end at the steaming hot pudding.
This was introduced to stop a plurality of solutions--called by the maker
of chess problems "cooks." I am not aware of more than one solution to
this puzzle; but as I may not have recorded all the tours, I cannot make a
positive statement on the point at the time of writing.

[Illustration]




60.--_Under the Mistletoe Bough._

Everybody was found to have kissed everybody else once under the
mistletoe, with the following additions and exceptions: No male kissed a
male; no man kissed a married woman except his own wife; all the
bachelors and boys kissed all the maidens and girls twice; the widower
did not kiss anybody, and the widows did not kiss each other. Every kiss
was returned, and the double performance was to count as one kiss. In
making a list of the company, we can leave out the widower altogether,
because he took no part in the osculatory exercise.

  7 Married couples       14
  3 Widows                 3
  12 Bachelors and Boys   12
  10 Maidens and Girls    10
  Total                   39 Persons

Now, if every one of these 39 persons kissed everybody else once, the
number of kisses would be 741; and if the 12 bachelors and boys each
kissed the 10 maidens and girls once again, we must add 120, making a
total of 861 kisses. But as no married man kissed a married woman other
than his own wife, we must deduct 42 kisses; as no male kissed another
male, we must deduct 171 kisses; and as no widow kissed another widow, we
must deduct 3 kisses. We have, therefore, to deduct 42+171+3=216 kisses
from the above total of 861, and the result, 645, represents exactly the
number of kisses that were actually given under the mistletoe bough.




61.--_The Silver Cubes._

There is no limit to the number of different dimensions that will give
two cubes whose sum shall be exactly seventeen cubic inches. Here is the
answer in the smallest possible numbers. One of the silver cubes must
measure 2-23278/40831 inches along each edge, and the other must measure
11663/40831 inch. If the reader likes to undertake the task of cubing
each number (that is, multiply each number twice by itself), he will find
that when added together the contents exactly equal seventeen cubic
inches. See also No. 20, "The Puzzle of the Doctor of Physic."




THE ADVENTURES OF THE PUZZLE CLUB




62.--_The Ambiguous Photograph._

One by one the members of the Club succeeded in discovering the key to
the mystery of the Ambiguous Photograph, except Churton, who was at
length persuaded to "give it up." Herbert Baynes then pointed out to him
that the coat that Lord Marksford was carrying over his arm was a lady's
coat, because the buttons are on the left side, whereas a man's coat
always has the buttons on the right-hand side. Lord Marksford would not
be likely to walk about the streets of Paris with a lady's coat over his
arm unless he was accompanying the owner. He was therefore walking with
the lady.

As they were talking a waiter brought a telegram to Baynes.

"Here you are," he said, after reading the message. "A wire from Dovey:
'Don't bother about photo. Find lady was the gentleman's sister, passing
through Paris.' That settles it. You might notice that the lady was
lightly clad, and therefore the coat might well be hers. But it is clear
that the rain was only a sudden shower, and no doubt they were close to
their destination, and she did not think it worth while to put the coat
on."




63.--_The Cornish Cliff Mystery._

Melville's explanation of the Cornish Cliff Mystery was very simple when
he gave it. Yet it was an ingenious trick that the two criminals adopted,
and it would have completely succeeded had not our friends from the
Puzzle Club accidentally appeared on the scene. This is what happened:
When Lamson and Marsh reached the stile, Marsh alone walked to the top of
the cliff, with Lamson's larger boots in his hands. Arrived at the edge
of the cliff, he changed the boots and walked backwards to the stile,
carrying his own boots.

This little manoeuvre accounts for the smaller footprints showing a
deeper impression at the heel, and the larger prints a deeper impression
at the toe; for a man will walk more heavily on his heels when going
forward, but will make a deeper impression with the toes in walking
backwards. It will also account for the fact that the large footprints
were sometimes impressed over the smaller ones, but never the reverse;
also for the circumstance that the larger footprints showed a shorter
stride, for a man will necessarily take a smaller stride when walking
backwards. The pocket-book was intentionally dropped, to lead the police
to discover the footprints, and so be put on the wrong scent.




64.--_The Runaway Motor-Car._

Russell found that there are just twelve five-figure numbers that have
the peculiarity that the first two figures multiplied by the last
three--all the figures being different, and there being no 0--will
produce a number with exactly the same five figures, in a different
order. But only one of these twelve begins with a 1--namely, 14926. Now,
if we multiply 14 by 926, the result is 12964, which contains the same
five figures. The number of the motor-car was therefore 14926.

Here are the other eleven numbers:--24651, 42678, 51246, 57834, 75231,
78624, 87435, 72936, 65281, 65983, and 86251.

Compare with the problems in "Digital Puzzles," section of _A. in M._,
and with Nos. 93 and 101 in these pages.




65.--_The Mystery of Ravensdene Park._

The diagrams show that there are two different ways in which the routes
of the various persons involved in the Ravensdene Mystery may be traced,
without any path ever crossing another. It depends whether the butler, E,
went to the north or the south of the gamekeeper's cottage, and the
gamekeeper, A, went to the south or the north of the hall. But it will be
found that the only persons who could have approached Mr. Cyril Hastings
without crossing a path were the butler, E, and the man, C. It was,
however, a fact that the butler retired to bed five minutes before
midnight, whereas Mr. Hastings did not leave his friend's house until
midnight. Therefore the criminal must have been the man who entered the
park at C.

[Illustration]




66.--_The Buried Treasure._

The field must have contained between 179 and 180 acres--to be more
exact, 179.37254 acres. Had the measurements been 3, 2, and 4 furlongs
respectively from successive corners, then the field would have been
209.70537 acres in area.

One method of solving this problem is as follows. Find the area of
triangle APB in terms of _x_, the side of the square. Double the
result=_xy_. Divide by _x_ and then square, and we have the value of
_y_^{2} in terms of _x_. Similarly find value of _z_^{2} in terms of _x_;
then solve the equation _y_^{2}+_z_^{2}=3^{2}, which will come out in the
form _x_^{4}-20_x_^{2}=-37. Therefore _x_^{2}=10+(sqrt{63})=17.937254
square furlongs, very nearly, and as there are ten acres in one square
furlong, this equals 179.37254 acres. If we take the negative root of the
equation, we get the area of the field as 20.62746 acres, in which case
the treasure would have been buried outside the field, as in Diagram 2.
But this solution is excluded by the condition that the treasure was
buried in the field. The words were, "The document ... states clearly
that the field is square, and that the treasure is buried in it."

[Illustration]




THE PROFESSOR'S PUZZLES




67.--_The Coinage Puzzle._

The point of this puzzle turns on the fact that if the magic square were
to be composed of whole numbers adding up 15 in all ways, the two must be
placed in one of the corners. Otherwise fractions must be used, and these
are supplied in the puzzle by the employment of sixpences and
half-crowns. I give the arrangement requiring the fewest possible current
English coins--fifteen. It will be seen that the amount in each corner is
a fractional one, the sum required in the total being a whole number of
shillings.

[Illustration]




68.--_The Postage Stamps Puzzles._

The first of these puzzles is based on a similar principle, though it is
really much easier, because the condition that nine of the stamps must
be of different values makes their selection a simple matter, though how
they are to be placed requires a little thought or trial until one knows
the rule respecting putting the fractions in the corners. I give the
solution.

[Illustration:

                     [1/2 d]
  [4-1/2 d]    [1 d]   [3 d]

  [2 d]        [3 d]     [4 d]

  [2-1/2 d]    [5 d]    [1-1/2 d]   ]


[Illustration:

  [4 d]                [1/2 d]
   [3 d]            [1-1/2 d]
                  [9 d]

  [10 d]     [6 d]     [2 d]

  [1 d]      [1 s.]    [5 d]   ]

I also show the solution to the second stamp puzzle. All the columns,
rows, and diagonals add up 1_s._ 6_d._ There is no stamp on one square,
and the conditions did not forbid this omission. The stamps at present
in circulation are these:--1/2_d._, 1_d._, 1-1/2_d._, 2_d._, 2-1/2_d._,
3_d._, 4_d._, 5_d._, 6_d._, 9_d._, 10_d._, 1_s._, 2_s._ 6_d._, 5_s._,
10_s._, £1, and £5. In the first solution the numbers are in arithmetical
progression--1, 1-1/2, 2, 2-1/2, 3, 3-1/2, 4, 4-1/2, 5. But any nine
numbers will form a magic square if we can write them thus:--

   1  2  3
   7  8  9
  13 14 15

where the horizontal differences are all alike and the vertical
differences all alike, but not necessarily the same as the horizontal.
This happens in the case of the second solution, the numbers of which may
be written:--

   0  1  2
   5  6  7
  10 11 12

Also in the case of the solution to No. 67, the Coinage Puzzle, the
numbers are, in shillings:--

  2      2-1/2  3
  4-1/2  5      5-1/2
  7      7-1/2  8

If there are to be nine _different_ numbers, 0 may occur once (as in the
solution to No. 22). Yet one might construct squares with negative
numbers, as follows:--

  -2  -1   0
   5   6   7
  12  13  14




69.--_The Frogs and Tumblers._

It is perfectly true, as the Professor said, that there is only one
solution (not counting a reversal) to this puzzle. The frogs that jump
are George in the third horizontal row; Chang, the artful-looking
batrachian at the end of the fourth row; and Wilhelmina, the fair
creature in the seventh row. George jumps downwards to the second tumbler
in the seventh row; Chang, who can only leap short distances in
consequence of chronic rheumatism, removes somewhat unwillingly to the
glass just above him--the eighth in the third row; while Wilhelmina, with
all the sprightliness of her youth and sex, performs the very creditable
saltatory feat of leaping to the fourth tumbler in the fourth row. In
their new positions, as shown in the accompanying diagram, it will be
found that of the eight frogs no two are in line vertically,
horizontally, or diagonally.

[Illustration]




70.--_Romeo and Juliet._

This is rather a difficult puzzle, though, as the Professor remarked when
Hawkhurst hit on the solution, it is "just one of those puzzles that a
person might solve at a glance" by pure luck. Yet when the solution, with
its pretty, symmetrical arrangement, is seen, it looks ridiculously
simple.

It will be found that Romeo reaches Juliet's balcony after visiting every
house once and only once, and making fourteen turnings, not counting the
turn he makes at starting. These are the fewest turnings possible, and
the problem can only be solved by the route shown or its reversal.

[Illustration]




71.--_Romeo's Second Journey._

[Illustration]

In order to take his trip through all the white squares only with the
fewest possible turnings, Romeo would do well to adopt the route I have
shown, by means of which only sixteen turnings are required to perform
the feat. The Professor informs me that the Helix Aspersa, or common or
garden snail, has a peculiar aversion to making turnings--so much so that
one specimen with which he made experiments went off in a straight line
one night and has never come back since.




72.--_The Frogs who would a-wooing go._

This is one of those puzzles in which a plurality of solutions is
practically unavoidable. There are two or three positions into which four
frogs may jump so as to form five rows with four in each row, but the
case I have given is the most satisfactory arrangement.

[Illustration]

The frogs that have jumped have left their astral bodies behind, in order
to show the reader the positions which they originally occupied. Chang,
the frog in the middle of the upper row, suffering from rheumatism, as
explained above in the Frogs and Tumblers solution, makes the shortest
jump of all--a little distance between the two rows; George and
Wilhelmina leap from the ends of the lower row to some distance N. by
N.W. and N. by N.E. respectively; while the frog in the middle of the
lower row, whose name the Professor forgot to state, goes direct S.




73.--_The Game of Kayles._

To win at this game you must, sooner or later, leave your opponent an
even number of similar groups. Then whatever he does in one group you
repeat in a similar group. Suppose, for example, that you leave him these
groups: o.o.ooo.ooo. Now, if he knocks down a single, you knock down a
single; if he knocks down two in one triplet, you knock down two in the
other triplet; if he knocks down the central kayle in a triplet, you
knock down the central one in the other triplet. In this way you must
eventually win. As the game is started with the arrangement
o.ooooooooooo, the first player can always win, but only by knocking down
the sixth or tenth kayle (counting the one already fallen as the second),
and this leaves in either case o.ooo.ooooooo, as the order of the groups
is of no importance. Whatever the second player now does, this can always
be resolved into an even number of equal groups. Let us suppose that he
knocks down the single one; then we play to leave him oo.ooooooo. Now,
whatever he does we can afterwards leave him either ooo.ooo or o.oo.ooo.
We know why the former wins, and the latter wins also; because, however
he may play, we can always leave him either o.o, or o.o.o.o, or oo.oo, as
the case may be. The complete analysis I can now leave for the amusement
of the reader.




74.--_The Broken Chessboard._

The illustration will show how the thirteen pieces can be put together so
as to construct the perfect board, and the reverse problem of cutting
these particular pieces out will be found equally entertaining.

[Illustration]

Compare with Nos. 293 and 294 in _A. in M._




75.--_The Spider and the Fly._

Though this problem was much discussed in the _Daily Mail_ from 18th
January to 7th February 1905, when it appeared to create great public
interest, it was actually first propounded by me in the _Weekly Dispatch_
of 14th June 1903.

Imagine the room to be a cardboard box. Then the box may be cut in
various different ways, so that the cardboard may be laid flat on the
table. I show four of these ways, and indicate in every case the relative
positions of the spider and the fly, and the straightened course which
the spider must take without going off the cardboard. These are the four
most favourable cases, and it will be found that the shortest route is in
No. 4, for it is only 40 feet in length (add the square of 32 to the
square of 24 and extract the square root). It will be seen that the
spider actually passes along five of the six sides of the room! Having
marked the route, fold the box up (removing the side the spider does not
use), and the appearance of the shortest course is rather surprising. If
the spider had taken what most persons will consider obviously the
shortest route (that shown in No. 1), he would have gone 42 feet! Route
No. 2 is 43.174 feet in length, and Route No. 3 is 40.718 feet.

[Illustration]

I will leave the reader to discover which are the shortest routes when
the spider and the fly are 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 feet from the ceiling and
the floor respectively.




76.--_The Perplexed Cellarman._

Brother John gave the first man three large bottles and one small
bottleful of wine, and one large and three small empty bottles. To each
of the other two men he gave two large and three small bottles of wine,
and two large and one small empty bottle. Each of the three then receives
the same quantity of wine, and the same number of each size of bottle.




77.--_Making a Flag._

The diagram shows how the piece of bunting is to be cut into two pieces.
Lower the piece on the right one "tooth," and they will form a perfect
square, with the roses symmetrically placed.

[Illustration]

It will be found interesting to compare this with No. 154 in _A. in M._




78.--_Catching the Hogs._

A very short examination of this puzzle game should convince the reader
that Hendrick can never catch the black hog, and that the white hog can
never be caught by Katrün.

Each hog merely runs in and out of one of the nearest corners and can
never be captured. The fact is, curious as it must at first sight appear,
a Dutchman cannot catch a black hog, and a Dutchwoman can never capture a
white one! But each can, without difficulty, catch one of the other
colour.

So if the first player just determines that he will send Hendrick after
the white porker and Katrün after the black one, he will have no
difficulty whatever in securing both in a very few moves.

It is, in fact, so easy that there is no necessity whatever to give the
line of play. We thus, by means of the game, solve the puzzle in real
life, why the Dutchman and his wife could not catch their pigs: in their
simplicity and ignorance of the peculiarities of Dutch hogs, each went
after the wrong animal.

The little principle involved in this puzzle is that known to
chess-players as "getting the opposition." The rule, in the case of my
puzzle (where the moves resemble rook moves in chess, with the added
condition that the rook may only move to an adjoining square), is simply
this. Where the number of squares on the same row, between the man or
woman and the hog, is odd, the hog can never be captured; where the
number of squares is even, a capture is possible. The number of squares
between Hendrick and the black hog, and between Katrün and the white hog,
is 1 (an odd number), therefore these individuals cannot catch the
animals they are facing. But the number between Hendrick and the white
hog, and between Katrün and the black one, is 6 (an even number),
therefore they may easily capture those behind them.




79.--_The Thirty-one Game._

By leading with a 5 the first player can always win. If your opponent
plays another 5, you play a 2 and score 12. Then as often as he plays a 5
you play a 2, and if at any stage he drops out of the series, 3, 10, 17,
24, 31, you step in and win. If after your lead of 5 he plays anything
but another 5, you make 10 or 17 and win. The first player may also win
by leading a 1 or a 2, but the play is complicated. It is, however, well
worth the reader's study.




80.--_The Chinese Railways._

This puzzle was artfully devised by the yellow man. It is not a matter
for wonder that the representatives of the five countries interested were
bewildered. It would have puzzled the engineers a good deal to construct
those circuitous routes so that the various trains might run with safety.
Diagram 1 shows directions for the five systems of lines, so that no line
shall ever cross another, and this appears to be the method that would
require the shortest possible mileage.

[Illustration]

The reader may wish to know how many different solutions there are to the
puzzle. To this I should answer that the number is indeterminate, and I
will explain why. If we simply consider the case of line A alone, then
one route would be Diagram 2, another 3, another 4, and another 5. If 3
is different from 2, as it undoubtedly is, then we must regard 5 as
different from 4. But a glance at the four diagrams, 2, 3, 4, 5, in
succession will show that we may continue this "winding up" process for
ever; and as there will always be an unobstructed way (however long and
circuitous) from stations B and E to their respective main lines, it is
evident that the number of routes for line A alone is infinite. Therefore
the number of complete solutions must also be infinite, if railway lines,
like other lines, have no breadth; and indeterminate, unless we are told
the greatest number of parallel lines that it is possible to construct in
certain places. If some clear condition, restricting these "windings up,"
were given, there would be no great difficulty in giving the number of
solutions. With any reasonable limitation of the kind, the number would,
I calculate, be little short of two thousand, surprising though it may
appear.




81.--_The Eight Clowns._

This is a little novelty in magic squares. These squares may be formed
with numbers that are in arithmetical progression, or that are not in
such progression. If a square be formed of the former class, one place
may be left vacant, but only under particular conditions. In the case of
our puzzle there would be no difficulty in making the magic square with 9
missing; but with 1 missing (that is, using 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9)
it is not possible. But a glance at the original illustration will show
that the numbers we have to deal with are not actually those just
mentioned. The clown that has a 9 on his body is portrayed just at the
moment when two balls which he is juggling are in mid-air. The positions
of these balls clearly convert his figure into the recurring decimal
.[.9]. Now, since the recurring decimal .[.9] is equal to 9/9, and
therefore to 1, it is evident that, although the clown who bears the
figure 1 is absent, the man who bears the figure 9 by this simple
artifice has for the occasion given his _figure_ the value of the
_number_ 1. The troupe can consequently be grouped in the following
manner:--

  7     5
  2  4  6
  3  8 .[.9]

Every column, every row, and each of the two diagonals now add up to 12.
This is the correct solution to the puzzle.




82.--_The Wizard's Arithmetic._

This puzzle is both easy and difficult, for it is a very simple matter to
find one of the multipliers, which is 86. If we multiply 8 by 86, all we
need do is to place the 6 in front and the 8 behind in order to get the
correct answer, 688. But the second number is not to be found by mere
trial. It is 71, and the number to be multiplied is no less than
1639344262295081967213114754098360655737704918032787. If you want to
multiply this by 71, all you have to do is to place another 1 at the
beginning and another 7 at the end--a considerable saving of labour!
These two, and the example shown by the wizard, are the only two-figure
multipliers, but the number to be multiplied may always be increased.
Thus, if you prefix to 41096 the number 41095890, repeated any number of
times, the result may always be multiplied by 83 in the wizard's peculiar
manner.

If we add the figures of any number together and then, if necessary,
again add, we at last get a single-figure number. This I call the
"digital root." Thus, the digital root of 521 is 8, and of 697 it is 4.
This digital analysis is extensively dealt with in _A. in M._ Now, it is
evident that the digital roots of the two numbers required by the puzzle
must produce the same root in sum and product. This can only happen when
the roots of the two numbers are 2 and 2, or 9 and 9, or 3 and 6, or 5
and 8. Therefore the two-figure multiplier must have a digital root of 2,
3, 5, 6, 8, or 9. There are ten such numbers in each case. I write out
all the sixty, then I strike out all those numbers where the second
figure is higher than the first, and where the two figures are alike
(thirty-six numbers in all); also all remaining numbers where the first
figure is odd and the second figure even (seven numbers); also all
multiples of 5 (three more numbers). The numbers 21 and 62 I reject on
inspection, for reasons that I will not enter into. I then have left, out
of the original sixty, only the following twelve numbers: 83, 63, 81, 84,
93, 42, 51, 87, 41, 86, 53, and 71. These are the only possible
multipliers that I have really to examine.

My process is now as curious as it is simple in working. First trying 83,
I deduct 10 and call it 73. Adding 0's to the second figure, I say if
30000, etc., ever has a remainder 43 when divided by 73, the dividend
will be the required multiplier for 83. I get the 43 in this way. The
only multiplier of 3 that produces an 8 in the digits place is 6. I
therefore multiply 73 by 6 and get 438, or 43 after rejecting the 8. Now,
300,000 divided by 73 leaves the remainder 43, and the dividend is 4,109.
To this 1 add the 6 mentioned above and get 41,096 x 83, the example
given on page 129.

In trying the even numbers there are two cases to be considered. Thus,
taking 86, we may say that if 60000, etc., when divided by 76 leaves
either 22 or 60 (because 3×6 and 8×6 both produce 8), we get a solution.
But I reject the former on inspection, and see that 60 divided by 76 is
0, leaving a remainder 60. Therefore 8 x 86 = 688, the other example. It
will be found in the case of 71 that 100000, etc., divided by 61 gives a
remainder 42, (7 × 61 = 427) after producing the long dividend at the
beginning of this article, with the 7 added.

The other multipliers fail to produce a solution, so 83, 86, and 71 are
the only three possible multipliers. Those who are familiar with the
principle of recurring decimals (as somewhat explained in my next note on
No. 83, "The Ribbon Problem") will understand the conditions under which
the remainders repeat themselves after certain periods, and will only
find it necessary in two or three cases to make any lengthy divisions. It
clearly follows that there is an unlimited number of multiplicands for
each multiplier.




83.--_The Ribbon Problem._

The solution is as follows: Place this rather lengthy number on the
ribbon, 0212765957446808510638297872340425531914393617. It may be
multiplied by any number up to 46 inclusive to give the same order of
figures in the ring. The number previously given can be multiplied by any
number up to 16. I made the limit 9 in order to put readers off the
scent. The fact is these two numbers are simply the recurring decimals
that equal 1/17 and 1/47 respectively. Multiply the one by seventeen and
the other by forty-seven, and you will get all nines in each case.

In transforming a vulgar fraction, say 1/17, to a decimal fraction, we
proceed as below, adding as many noughts to the dividend as we like until
there is no remainder, or until we get a recurring series of figures, or
until we have carried it as far as we require, since every additional
figure in a never-ending decimal carries us nearer and nearer to
exactitude.

  17) 100 (.058823
       85
     ----
       150
       136
      ----
        140
        136
       ----
          40
          34
        ----
           60
           51
         ----
            9

Now, since all powers of 10 can only contain factors of the powers of 2
and 5, it clearly follows that your decimal never will come to an end if
any other factor than these occurs in the denominator of your vulgar
fraction. Thus, 1/2, 1/4, and 1/8 give us the exact decimals, .5, .25,
and .125; 1/5 and 1/25 give us .2 and .04; 1/10 and 1/20 give us .1 and
.05: because the denominators are all composed of 2 and 5 factors. But if
you wish to convert 1/3, 1/6, or 1/7, your division sum will never end,
but you will get these decimals, .33333, etc., .166666, etc., and
.142857142857142857, etc., where, in the first case, the 3 keeps on
repeating for ever and ever; in the second case the 6 is the repeater,
and in the last case we get the recurring period of 142857. In the case
of 1/17 (in "The Ribbon Problem") we find the circulating period to be
.0588235294117647.

Now, in the division sum above, the successive remainders are 1, 10, 15,
14, 4, 6, 9, etc., and these numbers I have inserted around the inner
ring of the diagram. It will be seen that every number from 1 to 16
occurs once, and that if we multiply our ribbon number by any one of the
numbers in the inner ring its position indicates exactly the point at
which the product will begin. Thus, if we multiply by 4, the product will
be 235, etc.; if we multiply by 6, 352, etc. We can therefore multiply by
any number from 1 to 16 and get the desired result.

[Illustration]

The kernel of the puzzle is this: Any prime number, with the exception of
2 and 5, which are the factors of 10, will exactly divide without
remainder a number consisting of as many nines as the number itself, less
one. Thus 999999 (six 9's) is divisible by 7, sixteen 9's are divisible
by 17, eighteen 9's by 19, and so on. This is always the case, though
frequently fewer 9's will suffice; for one 9 is divisible by 3, two by
11, six by 13, when our ribbon rule for consecutive multipliers breaks
down and another law comes in. Therefore, since the 0 and 7 at the ends
of the ribbon may not be removed, we must seek a fraction with a prime
denominator ending in 7 that gives a full period circulator. We try 37,
and find that it gives a short period decimal, .027, because 37 exactly
divides 999; it, therefore, will not do. We next examine 47, and find
that it gives us the full period circulator, in 46 figures, at the
beginning of this article.

If you cut any of these full period circulators in half and place one
half under the other, you will find that they will add up all 9's; so you
need only work out one half and then write down the complements. Thus, in
the ribbon above, if you add 05882352 to 94117647 the result is 99999999,
and so with our long solution number. Note also in the diagram above that
not only are the opposite numbers on the outer ring complementary, always
making 9 when added, but that opposite numbers in the inner ring, our
remainders, are also complementary, adding to 17 in every case. I ought
perhaps to point out that in limiting our multipliers to the first nine
numbers it seems just possible that a short period circulator might give
a solution in fewer figures, but there are reasons for thinking it
improbable.




84.--_The Japanese Ladies and the Carpet._

If the squares had not to be all the same size, the carpet could be cut
in four pieces in any one of the three manners shown. In each case the
two pieces marked A will fit together and form one of the three squares,
the other two squares being entire. But in order to have the squares
exactly equal in size, we shall require six pieces, as shown in the
larger diagram. No. 1 is a complete square, pieces 4 and 5 will form a
second square, and pieces 2, 3, and 6 will form the third--all of exactly
the same size.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

If with the three equal squares we form the rectangle IDBA, then the mean
proportional of the two sides of the rectangle will be the side of a
square of equal area. Produce AB to C, making BC equal to BD. Then place
the point of the compasses at E (midway between A and C) and describe the
arc AC. I am showing the quite general method for converting rectangles
to squares, but in this particular case we may, of course, at once place
our compasses at E, which requires no finding. Produce the line BD,
cutting the arc in F, and BF will be the required side of the square. Now
mark off AG and DH, each equal to BF, and make the cut IG, and also the
cut HK from H, perpendicular to ID. The six pieces produced are numbered
as in the diagram on last page.

It will be seen that I have here given the reverse method first: to cut
the three small squares into six pieces to form a large square. In the
case of our puzzle we can proceed as follows:--

Make LM equal to half the diagonal ON. Draw the line NM and drop from L a
perpendicular on NM. Then LP will be the side of all the three squares of
combined area equal to the large square QNLO. The reader can now cut out
without difficulty the six pieces, as shown in the numbered square on the
last page.

[Illustration]




85.--_Captain Longbow and the Bears._

[Illustration]

It might have struck the reader that the story of the bear impaled on the
North Pole had no connection with the problem that followed. As a matter
of fact it is essential to a solution. Eleven bears cannot possibly be
arranged to form of themselves seven rows of bears with four bears in
every row. But it is a different matter when Captain Longbow informs us
that "they had so placed themselves that _there were_" seven rows of four
bears. For if they were grouped as shown in the diagram, so that three of
the bears, as indicated, were in line with the North Pole, that impaled
animal would complete the seventh row of four, which cannot be obtained
in any other way. It obviously does not affect the problem whether this
seventh row is a hundred miles long or a hundred feet, so long as they
were really in a straight line--a point that might perhaps be settled by
the captain's pocket compass.




86.--_The English Tour._

It was required to show how a resident at the town marked A might visit
every one of the towns once, and only once, and finish up his tour at Z.
This puzzle conceals a little trick. After the solver has demonstrated to
his satisfaction that it cannot be done in accordance with the conditions
as he at first understood them, he should carefully examine the wording
in order to find some flaw. It was said, "This would be easy enough if he
were able to cut across country by road, as well as by rail, but he is
not."

[Illustration]

Now, although he is prohibited from cutting across country by road,
nothing is said about his going by sea! If, therefore, we carefully look
again at the map, we shall find that two towns, and two only, lie on the
sea coast. When he reaches one of these towns he takes his departure on
board a coasting vessel and sails to the other port. The annexed
illustration shows, by a dark line, the complete route.

This problem should be compared with No. 250, "The Grand Tour," in _A. in
M._ It can be simplified in practically an identical manner, but as
there is here no choice on the first stage from A, the solutions are
necessarily quite different. See also solution to No. 94.




87.--_The Chifu-Chemulpo Puzzle._

The solution is as follows. You may accept the invitation to "try to do
it in twenty moves," but you will never succeed in performing the feat.
The fewest possible moves are twenty-six. Play the cars so as to reach
the following positions:--

   E5678
  --------  = 10 moves.
  1234

   E56
  --------  = 2 moves.
  123 87 4

   56
  --------  = 5 moves.
  E312 87 4

    E
  --------  = 9 moves.
  87654321

Twenty-six moves in all.




88.--_The Eccentric Market-woman._

The smallest possible number of eggs that Mrs. Covey could have taken to
market is 719. After selling half the number and giving half an egg over
she would have 359 left; after the second transaction she would have 239
left; after the third deal, 179; and after the fourth, 143. This last
number she could divide equally among her thirteen friends, giving each
11, and she would not have broken an egg.




89.--_The Primrose Puzzle._

The two words that solve this puzzle are BLUEBELL and PEARTREE. Place the
letters as follows: B 3-1, L 6-8, U 5-3, E 4-6, B 7-5, E 2-4, L 9-7, L
9-2. This means that you take B, jump from 3 to 1, and write it down on
1; and so on. The second word can be inserted in the same order. The
solution depends on finding those words in which the second and eighth
letters are the same, and also the fourth and sixth the same, because
these letters interchange without destroying the words. MARITIMA (or
sea-pink) would also solve the puzzle if it were an English word.

Compare with No. 226 in _A. in M._




90.--_The Round Table._

Here is the way of arranging the seven men:--

  A B C D E F G
  A C D B G E F
  A D B C F G E
  A G B F E C D
  A F C E G D B
  A E D G F B C
  A C E B G F D
  A D G C F E B
  A B F D E G C
  A E F D C G B
  A G E B D F C
  A F G C B E D
  A E B F C D G
  A G C E D B F
  A F D G B C E

Of course, at a circular table, A will be next to the man at the end of
the line.

I first gave this problem for six persons on ten days, in the _Daily
Mail_ for the 13th and 16th October 1905, and it has since been discussed
in various periodicals by mathematicians. Of course, it is easily seen
that the maximum number of sittings for _n_ persons is (_n_ - 1)(_n_
-2)/2 ways. The comparatively easy method for solving all cases where
_n_ is a prime+1 was first discovered by Ernest Bergholt. I then pointed
out the form and construction of a solution that I had obtained for 10
persons, from which E. D. Bewley found a general method for all even
numbers. The odd numbers, however, are extremely difficult, and for a
long time no progress could be made with their solution, the only numbers
that could be worked being 7 (given above) and 5, 9, 17, and 33, these
last four being all powers of 2+1. At last, however (though not without
much difficulty), I discovered a subtle method for solving all cases, and
have written out schedules for every number up to 25 inclusive. The case
of 11 has been solved also by W. Nash. Perhaps the reader will like to
try his hand at 13. He will find it an extraordinarily hard nut.

The solutions for all cases up to 12 inclusive are given in _A. in M._,
pp. 205, 206.




91.--_The Five Tea Tins._

There are twelve ways of arranging the boxes without considering the
pictures. If the thirty pictures were all different the answer would be
93,312. But the necessary deductions for cases where changes of boxes may
be made without affecting the order of pictures amount to 1,728, and the
boxes may therefore be arranged, in accordance with the conditions, in
91,584 different ways. I will leave my readers to discover for themselves
how the figures are to be arrived at.




92.--_The Four Porkers._

The number of ways in which the four pigs may be placed in the thirty-six
sties in accordance with the conditions is seventeen, including the
example that I gave, not counting the reversals and reflections of these
arrangements as different. Jaenisch, in his _Analyse Mathématique au jeu
des Échecs_ (1862), quotes the statement that there are just twenty-one
solutions to the little problem on which this puzzle is based. As I had
myself only recorded seventeen, I examined the matter again, and found
that he was in error, and, doubtless, had mistaken reversals for
different arrangements.

Here are the seventeen answers. The figures indicate the rows, and their
positions show the columns. Thus, 104603 means that we place a pig in the
first row of the _first_ column, in no row of the _second_ column, in the
fourth row of the _third_ column, in the sixth row of the _fourth_
column, in no row of the _fifth_ column, and in the third row of the
_sixth_ column. The arrangement E is that which I gave in diagram form:--

  A. 104603
  B. 136002
  C. 140502
  D. 140520
  E. 160025
  F. 160304
  G. 201405
  H. 201605
  I. 205104
  J. 206104
  K. 241005
  L. 250014
  M. 250630
  N. 260015
  O. 261005
  P. 261040
  Q. 306104

It will be found that forms N and Q are semi-symmetrical with regard to
the centre, and therefore give only two arrangements each by reversal and
reflection; that form H is quarter-symmetrical, and gives only four
arrangements; while all the fourteen others yield by reversal and
reflection eight arrangements each. Therefore the pigs may be placed in
(2 × 2) + (4 × 1) + (8 × 14) = 120 different ways by reversing and
reflecting all the seventeen forms.

Three pigs alone may be placed so that every sty is in line with a pig,
provided that the pigs are not forbidden to be in line with one another;
but there is only one way of doing it (if we do not count reversals as
different), as follows: 105030.




93.--_The Number Blocks._

Arrange the blocks so as to form the two multiplication sums 915 × 64 and
732 × 80, and the product in both cases will be the same: 58,560.




94.--_Foxes and Geese._

The smallest possible number of moves is twenty-two--that is, eleven for
the foxes and eleven for the geese. Here is one way of solving the
puzzle:

  10--5    11--6   12--7   5--12   6--1   7--6
  ----     ----    ----    ----    ----   ----
  1--8     2--9    3--4    8--3    9--10  4--9




  12--7    1--8    6--1    7--2    8--3
  ----     ----    ----    ----    ----
  3--4     10--5   9--10   4--11   5--12

Of course, the reader will play the first move in the top line, then the
first move in the second line, then the second move in the top line, and
so on alternately.

[Illustration]

In _A. in M._, p. 230, I have explained fully my "buttons and string"
method of solving puzzles on chequered boards. In Diagram A is shown the
puzzle in the form in which it may be presented on a portion of the
chessboard with six knights. A comparison with the illustration on page
141 will show that I have there dispensed with the necessity of
explaining the knight's move to the uninstructed reader by lines that
indicate those moves. The two puzzles are the same thing in different
dress. Now compare page 141 with Diagram B, and it will be seen that by
disentangling the strings I have obtained a simplified diagram without
altering the essential relations between the buttons or discs. The reader
will now satisfy himself without any difficulty that the puzzle requires
eleven moves for the foxes and eleven for the geese. He will see that a
goose on 1 or 3 must go to 8, to avoid being one move from a fox and to
enable the fox on 11 to come on to the ring. If we play 1--8, then it is
clearly best to play 10--5 and not 12--5 for the foxes. When they are all
on the circle, then they simply promenade round it in a clockwise
direction, taking care to reserve 8--3 and 5--12 for the final moves. It
is thus rendered ridiculously easy by this method. See also notes on
solutions to Nos. 13 and 85.




95.--_Robinson Crusoe's Table._

The diagram shows how the piece of wood should be cut in two pieces to
form the square table-top. A, B, C, D are the corners of the table. The
way in which the piece E fits into the piece F will be obvious to the eye
of the reader. The shaded part is the wood that is discarded.




96.--_The Fifteen Orchards._

The number must be the least common multiple of 1, 2, 3, etc., up to 15,
that, when divided by 7, leaves the remainder 1, by 9 leaves 3, by 11
leaves 10, by 13 leaves 3, and by 14 leaves 8. Such a number is 120. The
next number is 360,480, but as we have no record of a tree--especially a
very young one--bearing anything like such a large number of apples, we
may take 120 to be the only answer that is acceptable.




97.--_The Perplexed Plumber._

The rectangular closed cistern that shall hold a given quantity of water
and yet have the smallest possible surface of metal must be a perfect
cube--that is, a cistern every side of which is a square. For 1,000 cubic
feet of water the internal dimensions will be 10 ft. × 10 ft. × 10 ft.,
and the zinc required will be 600 square feet. In the case of a cistern
without a top the proportions will be exactly half a cube. These are the
"exact proportions" asked for in the second case. The exact dimensions
cannot be given, but 12.6 ft. × 12.6 ft. × 6.3 ft. is a close
approximation. The cistern will hold a little too much water, at which
the buyer will not complain, and it will involve the plumber in a
trifling loss not worth considering.




98.--_The Nelson Column._

If you take a sheet of paper and mark it with a diagonal line, as in
Figure A, you will find that when you roll it into cylindrical form, with
the line outside, it will appear as in Figure B.

[Illustration]

It will be seen that the spiral (in one complete turn) is merely the
hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle, of which the length and width of
the paper are the other two sides. In the puzzle given, the lengths of
the two sides of the triangle are 40 ft. (one-fifth of 200 ft.) and 16
ft. 8 in. Therefore the hypotenuse is 43 ft. 4 in. The length of the
garland is therefore five times as long--216 ft. 8 in. A curious feature
of the puzzle is the fact that with the dimensions given the result is
exactly the sum of the height and the circumference.




99.--_The Two Errand Boys._

All that is necessary is to add the two distances at which they meet to
twice their difference. Thus 720 + 400 + 640 = 1760 yards, or one mile,
which is the distance required. Or, put another way, three times the
first distance less the second distance will always give the answer, only
the first distance should be more than two-thirds of the second.




100.--_On the Ramsgate Sands._

Just six different rings may be formed without breaking the conditions.
Here is one way of effecting the arrangements.

  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
  A C E G I K M B D F H J L
  A D G J M C F I L B E H K
  A E I M D H L C G K B F J
  A F K C H M E J B G L D I
  A G M F L E K D J C I B H

Join the ends and you have the six rings.

Lucas devised a simple mechanical method for obtaining the _n_ rings that
may be formed under the conditions by 2_n_+1 children.




101.--_The Three Motor-Cars._

The only set of three numbers, of two, three, and five figures
respectively, that will fulfil the required conditions is 27 × 594 =
16,038. These three numbers contain all the nine digits and 0, without
repetition; the first two numbers multiplied together make the third, and
the second is exactly twenty-two times the first. If the numbers might
contain one, four, and five figures respectively, there would be many
correct answers, such as 3 × 5,694 = 17,082; but it is a curious fact
that there is only one answer to the problem as propounded, though it is
no easy matter to prove that this is the case.




102.--_A Reversible Magic Square._

[Illustration:

  11  77  62  29
  69  22  17  71
  27  61  79  12
  72  19  21  67   ]

It will be seen that in the arrangement given every number is different,
and all the columns, all the rows, and each of the two diagonals, add up
179, whether you turn the page upside down or not. The reader will notice
that I have not used the figures 3, 4, 5, 8, or 0.




103.--_The Tube Railway._

There are 640 different routes. A general formula for puzzles of this
kind is not practicable. We have obviously only to consider the
variations of route between B and E. Here there are nine sections or
"lines," but it is impossible for a train, under the conditions, to
traverse more than seven of these lines in any route. In the following
table by "directions" is meant the order of stations irrespective of
"routes." Thus, the "direction" BCDE gives nine "routes," because there
are three ways of getting from B to C, and three ways of getting from D
to E. But the "direction" BDCE admits of no variation; therefore yields
only one route.

  2  two-line directions of  3 routes --   6
  1  three-line    "      "  1   "    --   1
  1      "         "      "  9   "    --   9
  2  four-line     "      "  6   "    --  12
  2      "         "      " 18   "    --  36
  6  five-line     "      "  6   "    --  36
  2      "         "      " 18   "    --  36
  2  six-line      "      " 36   "    --  72
  12 seven-line    "      " 36   "    -- 432
                                        ----
                   Total                 640

We thus see that there are just 640 different routes in all, which is the
correct answer to the puzzle.




104.--_The Skipper and the Sea-Serpent._

Each of the three pieces was clearly three cables long. But Simon
persisted in assuming that the cuts were made transversely, or across,
and that therefore the complete length was nine cables. The skipper,
however, explained (and the point is quite as veracious as the rest of
his yarn) that his cuts were made longitudinally--straight from the tip
of the nose to the tip of the tail! The complete length was therefore
only three cables, the same as each piece. Simon was not asked the exact
length of the serpent, but how long it _must_ have been. It must have
been at least three cables long, though it might have been (the skipper's
statement apart) anything from that up to nine cables, according to the
direction of the cuts.




105.--_The Dorcas Society._

If there were twelve ladies in all, there would be 132 kisses among the
ladies alone, leaving twelve more to be exchanged with the curate--six to
be given by him and six to be received. Therefore, of the twelve ladies,
six would be his sisters. Consequently, if twelve could do the work in
four and a half months, six ladies would do it in twice the time--four
and a half months longer--which is the correct answer.

At first sight there might appear to be some ambiguity about the words,
"Everybody kissed everybody else, except, of course, the bashful young
man himself." Might this not be held to imply that all the ladies
immodestly kissed the curate, although they were not (except the sisters)
kissed by him in return? No; because, in that case, it would be found
that there must have been twelve girls, not one of whom was a sister,
which is contrary to the conditions. If, again, it should be held that
the sisters might not, according to the wording, have kissed their
brother, although he kissed them, I reply that in that case there must
have been twelve girls, all of whom must have been his sisters. And the
reference to the ladies who might have worked exclusively of the sisters
shuts out the possibility of this.




106.--_The Adventurous Snail._

At the end of seventeen days the snail will have climbed 17 ft., and at
the end of its eighteenth day-time task it will be at the top. It
instantly begins slipping while sleeping, and will be 2 ft. down the
other side at the end of the eighteenth day of twenty-four hours. How
long will it take over the remaining 18 ft.? If it slips 2 ft. at night
it clearly overcomes the tendency to slip 2 ft. during the daytime, in
climbing up. In rowing up a river we have the stream against us, but in
coming down it is with us and helps us. If the snail can climb 3 ft. and
overcome the tendency to slip 2 ft. in twelve hours' ascent, it could
with the same exertion crawl 5 ft. a day on the level. Therefore, in
going down, the same exertion carries it 7 ft. in twelve hours--that is,
5 ft. by personal exertion and 2 ft. by slip. This, with the night slip,
gives it a descending progress of 9 ft. in the twenty-four hours. It can,
therefore, do the remaining 18 ft. in exactly two days, and the whole
journey, up and down, will take it exactly twenty days.




107.--_The Four Princes._

When Montucla, in his edition of Ozanam's _Recreations in Mathematics_,
declared that "No more than three right-angled triangles, equal to each
other, can be found in whole numbers, but we may find as many as we
choose in fractions," he curiously overlooked the obvious fact that if
you give all your sides a common denominator and then cancel that
denominator you have the required answer in integers!

Every reader should know that if we take any two numbers, _m_ and _n_,
then _m_^2 + _n_^2, _m_^2 - _n_^2, and _2mn_ will be the three sides of a
rational right-angled triangle. Here _m_ and _n_ are called generating
numbers. To form three such triangles of equal area, we use the following
simple formula, where _m_ is the greater number:--

  _mn_ + _m_^2 + _n_^2 = _a_
  _m_^2 - _n_^2 = _b_
  2_mn_ + _n_^2 = _c_

Now, if we form three triangles from the following pairs of generators,
_a_ and _b_, _a_ and _c_, _a_ and _b_ + _c_, they will all be of equal
area. This is the little problem respecting which Lewis Carroll says in
his diary (see his _Life and Letters_ by Collingwood, p. 343), "Sat up
last night till 4 a.m., over a tempting problem, sent me from New York,
'to find three equal rational-sided right-angled triangles.' I found two
... but could not find three!"

The following is a subtle formula by means of which we may always find a
R.A.T. equal in area to any given R.A.T. Let _z_ = hypotenuse, _b_ =
base, _h_ = height, _a_ = area of the given triangle; then all we have
to do is to form a R.A.T. from the generators _z_^2 and 4_a_, and give
each side the denominator 2_z_ (_b_^2 - _h_^2), and we get the required
answer in fractions. If we multiply all three sides of the original
triangle by the denominator, we shall get at once a solution in whole
numbers.

The answer to our puzzle in smallest possible numbers is as follows:--

  First Prince ...  518   1320   1418
  Second Prince ... 280   2442   2458
  Third Prince ...  231   2960   2969
  Fourth Prince ... 111   6160   6161

The area in every case is 341,880 square furlongs. I must here refrain
from showing fully how I get these figures. I will explain, however, that
the first three triangles are obtained, in the manner shown, from the
numbers 3 and 4, which give the generators 37, 7; 37, 33; 37, 40. These
three pairs of numbers solve the indeterminate equation, _a_^3_b_
-_b_^3_a_ = 341,880. If we can find another pair of values, the thing is
done. These values are 56, 55, which generators give the last triangle.
The next best answer that I have found is derived from 5 and 6, which
give the generators 91, 11; 91, 85; 91, 96. The fourth pair of values is
63, 42.

The reader will understand from what I have written above that there is
no limit to the number of rational-sided R.A.T.'s of equal area that may
be found in whole numbers.




108.--_Plato and the Nines._

The following is the simple solution of the three nines puzzle:--

  9 + 9
  ----
   .9

To divide 18 by .9 (or nine-tenths) we, of course, multiply by 10 and
divide by 9. The result is 20, as required.




109.--_Noughts and Crosses._

The solution is as follows: Between two players who thoroughly understand
the play every game should be drawn. Neither player could ever win except
through the blundering of his opponent. If Nought (the first player)
takes the centre, Cross must take a corner, or Nought may beat him with
certainty. If Nought takes a corner on his first play, Cross must take
the centre at once, or again be beaten with certainty. If Nought leads
with a side, both players must be very careful to prevent a loss, as
there are numerous pitfalls. But Nought may safely lead anything and
secure a draw, and he can only win through Cross's blunders.




110.--_Ovid's Game._

The solution here is: The first player can always win, provided he plays
to the centre on his first move. But a good variation of the game is to
bar the centre for the first move of the first player. In that case the
second player should take the centre at once. This should always end in a
draw, but to ensure it the first player must play to two adjoining
corners (such as 1 and 3) on his first and second moves. The game then
requires great care on both sides.




111.--_The Farmer's Oxen._

Sir Isaac Newton has shown us, in his _Universal Arithmetic_, that we may
divide the bullocks in each case in two parts--one part to eat the
increase, and the other the accumulated grass. The first will vary
directly as the size of the field, and will not depend on the time; the
second part will also vary directly as the size of the field, and in
addition inversely with the time. We find from the farmer's statements
that 6 bullocks keep down the growth in a 10-acre field, and 6 bullocks
eat the grass on 10 acres in 16 weeks. Therefore, if 6 bullocks keep down
the growth on 10 acres, 24 will keep down the growth on 40 acres.

Again, we find that if 6 bullocks eat the accumulated grass on 10 acres
in 16 weeks, then

   12 eat the grass on 10 acres in 8 weeks,
   48  "        "      40   "      8   "
  192  "        "      40   "      2   "
   64  "        "      40   "      6   "

Add the two results together (24 + 64), and we find that 88 oxen may be
fed on a 40-acre meadow for 6 weeks, the grass growing regularly all the
time.




112.--_The Great Grangemoor Mystery._

We were told that the bullet that killed Mr. Stanton Mowbray struck the
very centre of the clock face and instantly welded together the hour,
minute, and second hands, so that all revolved in one piece. The puzzle
was to tell from the fixed relative positions of the three hands the
exact time when the pistol was fired.

We were also told, and the illustration of the clock face bore out the
statement, that the hour and minute hands were exactly twenty divisions
apart, "the third of the circumference of the dial." Now, there are
eleven times in twelve hours when the hour hand is exactly twenty
divisions ahead of the minute hand, and eleven times when the minute hand
is exactly twenty divisions ahead of the hour hand. The illustration
showed that we had only to consider the former case. If we start at four
o'clock, and keep on adding 1 h. 5 m. 27-3/11 sec., we shall get all
these eleven times, the last being 2 h. 54 min. 32-8/11 sec. Another
addition brings us back to four o'clock. If we now examine the clock
face, we shall find that the seconds hand is nearly twenty-two divisions
behind the minute hand, and if we look at all our eleven times we shall
find that only in the last case given above is the seconds hand at this
distance. Therefore the shot must have been fired at 2 h. 54 min. 32-8/11
sec. exactly, or, put the other way, at 5 min. 27-3/11 sec. to three
o'clock. This is the correct and only possible answer to the puzzle.




113.--_Cutting a Wood Block._

Though the cubic contents are sufficient for twenty-five pieces, only
twenty-four can actually be cut from the block. First reduce the length
of the block by half an inch. The smaller piece cut off constitutes the
portion that cannot be used. Cut the larger piece into three slabs, each
one and a quarter inch thick, and it will be found that eight blocks may
easily be cut out of each slab without any further waste.




114.--_The Tramps and the Biscuits._

The smallest number of biscuits must have been 1021, from which it is
evident that they were of that miniature description that finds favour in
the nursery. The general solution is that for _n_ men the number must be
_m_ (_n_^{_n_+1}) - (_n_ - 1), where _m_ is any integer. Each man will
receive _m_ (_n_ - 1)^_n_ - 1 biscuits at the final division, though in
the case of two men, when _m_ = 1, the final distribution only benefits
the dog. Of course, in every case each man steals an _n_th of the number
of biscuits, after giving the odd one to the dog.
